[Don't merge] Create dotnet-monitor.md (#1267)
dotnet/diagnostics: documentation/dotnet-monitor.md

> # Introducing dotnet-monitor, an experimental tool

Author: This was feedback from @BethMassi as it was easy to miss in the first sentence

> # Introducing dotnet-monitor, an experimental tool

Reviewer: I trust her messaging guidance better than mine, ignore my comment : )

`dotnet-monitor` is experimental tool that makes it easier to get access to diagnostics information in a dotnet process.

When running a dotnet application, either locally or in a Kubernetes cluster, environmental differences  can make collecting diagnostics artifacts (e.g., logs, traces, process dumps) challenging. `dotnet-monitor` aims to simplify the process by abstracting over all environmental differences and exposing a consistent REST API regardless of where your application is run.

> `dotnet-monitor` will be made available via two different distribution mechanism:

Author: Sounds good. I'm going to combine this feedback along with your other feedback and try and front-load the environment specific instructions.

docker run -it --rm -p 52323:52323 -v diagnosticsserver:/tmp mcr.microsoft.com/dotnet/nightly/monitor --urls http://*:52323
```

When running in cluster, it is recommend to run the `dotnet-monitor` container as a sidecar alongside your application container in the pod. This sample Kubernetes manifest shows how to configure your deployment to include a sidecar container.

```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: dotnet-hello-world
spec:
  replicas: 1
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: dotnet-hello-world
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: dotnet-hello-world
    spec:
      volumes:
      - name: diagnostics
        emptyDir: {}
      containers:
      - name: server
        image: mcr.microsoft.com/dotnet/core/samples:aspnetapp
        ports:
        - containerPort: 80
        volumeMounts:
          - mountPath: /tmp
            name: diagnostics
      - name: sidecar
        image: mcr.microsoft.com/dotnet/nightly/monitor
        ports:
        - containerPort: 52325
        # args: ["--urls", "http://*:52323", "--metricUrls", "http://*:52325"]
        volumeMounts:
          - name: diagnostics
            mountPath: /tmp
```

> In the default configuration `dotnet-monitor` binds to two different  groups of URLs. The URLs controlled via the `--urls` parameter (defaults to http://localhost:52323) expose all the collection endpoints. The URLs controlled via the ``--metricUrls` parameter (defaults to http://localhost:52325) only exposes the `/metrics` endpoint. Since diagnostics artifacts such as logs, dumps, and traces can leak sensitive information about the application, it is **strongly recommended** that you only expose the metrics URL in the container scenario.

Author: I guess expose is an overloaded term. It could mean make available to other services in your cluster or it could mean make available to the public internet.

In this case, I meant make available to other services in your cluster. I'll be explicit

> In the default configuration `dotnet-monitor` binds to two different  groups of URLs. The URLs controlled via the `--urls` parameter (defaults to http://localhost:52323) expose all the collection endpoints. The URLs controlled via the ``--metricUrls` parameter (defaults to http://localhost:52325) only exposes the `/metrics` endpoint. Since diagnostics artifacts such as logs, dumps, and traces can leak sensitive information about the application, it is **strongly recommended** that you only expose the metrics URL in the container scenario.

Author: I changed the guidance up front to recommend not to expose any endpoint. I will go into greater details in the metrics section.

> ### Endpoints

Author: @noahfalk Did you have an example in mind? I took a stab at it, but it feels extremely contrived. Any real example felt it like it took away too much from dotnet-monitor and needed far too much of an introduction

The REST API exposed by dotnet-monitor exposes the following endpoints:

- `/processes`
- `/dump/{pid?}`
- `/gcdump/{pid?}`
- `/trace/{pid?}`
- `/logs/{pid?}`
- `/metrics`

In the sections that follow we'll look at the functionality exposed by each of these endpoints and how you can use these endpoints to collect diagnostics artifacts.

### Processes

The `/processes` endpoint returns a list of target processes accessible to `dotnet-monitor`. 

> > NOTE: When running locally the `dotnet-monitor` tools lists itself as one of the target processes. 

Author: I felt the need to call this out specifically since when dotnet-monitor detects only one target process, there isn't a need to explicitly specify a process id. Given that dotnet-monitor always detects itself, it breaks a big convenience in the tool and is worth calling out.

I will move it to the end of the section.

> > NOTE: When running locally the `dotnet-monitor` tools lists itself as one of the target processes. 

Author: And yes, you are right in that this is behavior we don't want.
https://github.com/dotnet/diagnostics/issues/1270

curl -s http://localhost:52323/processes | jq
fg # Bring process back to foreground
# Send ^C to stop kubectl port-forward

```

As a convenience, `dotnet-monitor` does not require you to specify a process id for the remaining diagnostic endpoints when there's only one accessible process.

### Dump

The `/dump` endpoint returns a process dump of the target process.

Use `kubectl get pods` to get the name of your pod and then run the following snippet:

```powershell
$job = Start-Job -ScriptBlock { kubectl port-forward pods/dotnet-hello-world-558948b9dd-pjmjm 52323:52323 }
Start http://localhost:52323/dump
Stop-Job $job
Remove-Job $job
```

```bash
kubectl port-forward pods/dotnet-hello-world-558948b9dd-pjmjm 52323:52323 >/dev/null &
wget --content-disposition http://localhost:52323/dump
fg # Bring process back to foreground
# Send ^C to stop kubectl port-forward
```

When run against a Kubernetes cluster running Linux, the resulting core dump are linux ELF dumps. If you are running on Windows/macOS, you can use the existing [dotnet-dump](https://docs.microsoft.com/dotnet/core/diagnostics/dotnet-dump) tool to analyze the generated dump.

> 

Reviewer: You may also need to clarify that dotnet-dump is currently required to run on a machine with the same OS/architecture/libc variant as the target the dump was collected from.

> 

Author: I did mean Windows/macOS. To clarify, I should have said when collecting a dump artifact produced on a machine on different OS/architecture, you will not be able to analyze the dumps locally. One way around this is to use a Docker container if the collected dump is a linux ELF dump

> 

Reviewer: I think my confusion is that in the context of this blog saying we can analyze something implies dotnet-monitor collected it, but dotnet monitor on macOS can not collect a dump.

> 

Author: Fair enough.

Start http://localhost:52323/gcdump
Stop-Job $job
Remove-Job $job
```

```bash
kubectl port-forward pods/dotnet-hello-world-558948b9dd-pjmjm 52323:52323 >/dev/null &
wget --content-disposition http://localhost:52323/gcdump
fg # Bring process back to foreground
# Send ^C to stop kubectl port-forward
```

Unlike in the case of process dumps, the resulting GC dump is a portable format and can be analyzed by Visual Studio and [perfview](https://github.com/microsoft/perfview) regardless of the platform it was collected on. To learn more about when to collect GC dumps and how to analyze them, take a look at our [earlier blog post](https://devblogs.microsoft.com/dotnet/collecting-and-analyzing-memory-dumps/).

### Traces

The `/trace` endpoint returns a trace of the target process. The default trace profile include sampled CPU stacks, HTTP request start/stop events, and metrics for a duration of 30 seconds.

The duration of collection can be customized via the `durationSeconds` querystring parameter The diagnostic data can be customized via the `profile` querystring parameter to include additional to select any combination of the preset profiles:

- `CPU` (CPU profiler),

> - `Http` (Request start/stop events from ASP.NET Core),

Author: Filed an issue for this https://github.com/dotnet/diagnostics/issues/1271

# Introducing dotnet-monitor, an experimental tool

> `dotnet-monitor` is experimental tool that makes it easier to get access to diagnostics information in a dotnet process.

Reviewer 2: ...is *an* experimental...

> `dotnet-monitor` is experimental tool that makes it easier to get access to diagnostics information in a dotnet process.

Author: ```suggestion
`dotnet-monitor` is an experimental tool that makes it easier to get access to diagnostics information in a dotnet process.
```

> When running a dotnet application, on a local machine, on a remote server, in a VM, or in a Kubernetes cluster, environmental differences  can make collecting diagnostics artifacts (e.g., logs, traces, process dumps) challenging. `dotnet-monitor` aims to simplify the process by abstracting over all environmental differences and exposing a consistent REST API regardless of where your application is run.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When running a dotnet application differences in diverse local and production environments can make collecting diagnostics artifacts (e.g., logs, traces, process dumps) challenging. `dotnet-monitor` aims to simplify the process by exposing a consistent REST API regardless of where your application is run.
```

```bash
dotnet tool install -g dotnet-monitor --add-source https://dnceng.pkgs.visualstudio.com/public/_packaging/dotnet5-transport/nuget/v3/index.json --version 5.0.0-preview*
```

Once installed you can run `dotnet-monitor` via the following command:

```bash
dotnet monitor collect
```

#### Running in Docker

When consuming `dotnet-monitor` as a container image, it can be pulled from [MCR](https://hub.docker.com/_/microsoft-dotnet-nightly-monitor/) using the following command:

```bash
docker pull mcr.microsoft.com/dotnet/nightly/monitor:5.0.0-preview1
```
Once you have the image pulled locally, you will need to share a volume mount between your application container and `dotnet-monitor`

```bash
docker volume create diagnosticserver
docker run -d --rm -p 8000:80 -v diagnosticsserver:/tmp mcr.microsoft.com/dotnet/core/samples:aspnetapp
docker run -it --rm -p 52323:52323 -v diagnosticsserver:/tmp mcr.microsoft.com/dotnet/nightly/monitor:5.0.0-preview1 --urls http://*:52323
```
#### Running in a Kubernetes cluster

> When running in cluster, it is recommend to run the `dotnet-monitor` container as a sidecar alongside your application container in the pod. This sample Kubernetes manifest shows how to configure your deployment to include a sidecar container.

Reviewer 2: running in ***a*** cluster...

Author: ```suggestion
When running in a cluster, it is recommend to run the `dotnet-monitor` container as a sidecar alongside your application container in the pod. This sample Kubernetes manifest shows how to configure your deployment to include a sidecar container.
```

```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: dotnet-hello-world
spec:
  replicas: 1
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: dotnet-hello-world
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: dotnet-hello-world
    spec:
      volumes:
      - name: diagnostics
        emptyDir: {}
      containers:
      - name: server
        image: mcr.microsoft.com/dotnet/core/samples:aspnetapp
        ports:
        - containerPort: 80
        volumeMounts:
          - mountPath: /tmp
            name: diagnostics
      - name: sidecar
        image: mcr.microsoft.com/dotnet/nightly/monitor
        ports:

>         - containerPort: 52325

Reviewer 3: Note on aks we will bind to *:52325 automatically, since metrics scraping won't work against localhost binding.

>         # args: ["--urls", "http://*:52323", "--metricUrls", "http://*:52325"]

Reviewer 3: note that port-forward works fine against localhost binding in aks (since pods run as host network by default instead of bridge, like they do locally)

        volumeMounts:
          - name: diagnostics
            mountPath: /tmp
```

> Unlike other target environments, this configuration does not make available the the diagnostics endpoint on your host network. You will need to port forward traffic from your host to your target cluster.

Reviewer 2: the ~~the~~

> Unlike other target environments, this configuration does not make available the the diagnostics endpoint on your host network. You will need to port forward traffic from your host to your target cluster.

Author: ```suggestion
Unlike other target environments, this configuration does not make available the diagnostics endpoint on your host network. You will need to port forward traffic from your host to your target cluster.
```

> To do this, let us get the name of this desired pod we wish to forward traffic to using the `kubectl` command.

Reviewer 2: name of **the** desired

> To do this, let us get the name of this desired pod we wish to forward traffic to using the `kubectl` command.

Author: ```suggestion
To do this, let us get the name of the pod we wish to forward traffic to using the `kubectl` command.
```

```bash
$ kubectl get pod -l app=dotnet-hello-world
NAME                                 READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
dotnet-hello-world-dc6f67566-t2dzd   2/2     Running   0          37m
```

Once we have our desired pod name, we can forward traffic using the the `kubectl port-forward` command:

In PowerShell,

```powershell
PS> $job = Start-Job -ScriptBlock { kubectl port-forward pods/dotnet-hello-world-dc6f67566-t2dzd 52323:52323 }
```
In bash,

```bash
$ kubectl port-forward pods/dotnet-hello-world-dc6f67566-t2dzd 52323:52323 >/dev/null &
```

> Once we have started forwarding traffic from our local network to the desired pod, we can our desired API call. As an example, you can run the following command:

Reviewer 2: we can **make** our desired API call

> Once we have started forwarding traffic from our local network to the desired pod, we can our desired API call. As an example, you can run the following command:

Author: ```suggestion
Once we have started forwarding traffic from our local network to the desired pod, we can make our desired API call. As an example, you can run the following command:
```

```

Once we have completed collecting our desired diagnostics artifacts, we can successfully stop forwarding traffic into the container using the following command:

In PowerShell,
```powershell
PS> Stop-Job $job
PS> Remove-Job $job
```

In bash,
```bash
$ pkill kubectl
```

### Endpoints

The REST API exposed by dotnet-monitor exposes the following endpoints:

- `/processes`
- `/dump/{pid?}`
- `/gcdump/{pid?}`
- `/trace/{pid?}`
- `/logs/{pid?}`
- `/metrics`

In the sections that follow we'll look at the functionality exposed by each of these endpoints and how you can use these endpoints to collect diagnostics artifacts.

### Processes

The `/processes` endpoint returns a list of target processes accessible to `dotnet-monitor`. 

To get a list of available processes, run the following command:

In PowerShell,
```powershell
PS> Invoke-RestMethod http://localhost:52323/processes

pid
---
  1

```

In bash,
```bash
$ curl -s http://localhost:52323/processes | jq
[
  {
    "pid": 1
  }
]
```

As a convenience, `dotnet-monitor` does not require you to specify a process id for the remaining diagnostic endpoints when there's only one accessible process.

> > NOTE: When running locally the `dotnet-monitor` tools lists itself as one of the target processes. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Known Issue: When running locally the `dotnet-monitor` tools lists itself as one of the target processes. 
```

To collect a trace of the target process, run the following command:

In PowerShell,

```powershell
PS> Start-Process http://localhost:52323/trace
```

In bash,
```bash
$ wget --content-disposition http://localhost:52323/trace
```

The resulting `.nettrace` file can be analyzed with both Visual Studio and PerfView.

### Logs

The `/logs` endpoint will stream logs from the target process for a duration of 30 seconds.

The duration of collection can be customized via the `durationSeconds` querystring parameter. The logs endpoint is capable of returning either newline delimited JSON([application/x-ndjson](https://github.com/ndjson/ndjson-spec)) or the Event stream format([text/event-stream](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/Server-sent_events/Using_server-sent_events#Event_stream_format)) based on the specified `Accept` header in the HTTP request.

To start streaming log from the target process, run the following command:

In PowerShell,

```powershell
PS> Start-Process http://localhost:52323/logs
```

In bash,
```bash
$ curl -H "Accept:application/x-ndjson" http://localhost:52323/logs --no-buffer
```

> 

Reviewer: Perhaps clarify what logs are captured or provide some example logs from the asp.net helloworld?

Author: Added

### Metrics

The `/metrics` endpoint will return a snapshot of runtime and ASP.NET Core metrics in the [prometheus exposition format](https://prometheus.io/docs/instrumenting/exposition_formats/#text-based-format). Unlike the other diagnostics endpoints, the metrics endpoint will not be available if `dotnet-trace` detects more than one target process. In addition to being accessible via the URLs configured via the `--urls` parameters, the metrics endpoint is also accessible from the URLs configured via the `--metricUrls`. When running in Kubernetes, it may be suitable to expose the metrics URL to other services in your cluster to allow them to scrape metrics.

> While metrics collection is enabled by default when `dotnet-monitor` detects exactly one target process, it can configured to disable to collection of metrics entirely via the `--metrics` parameter. In the example below, metrics collection will not be enabled.

Reviewer: I'd expect people will prioritize learning how it works before learning how to turn it off

Author: Makes sense. Will move to the end of the section

````bash
dotnet monitor collect --metrics false
````

> When deploying in-cluster, a common patter to collect metrics is to use Prometheus or another monitoring tool to scrape the metrics endpoint exposed by your application. As an example, when running in Azure Kubernetes Services(AKS), you can [configure Azure Monitor to scrape prometheus metrics](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/azure-monitor/insights/container-insights-prometheus-integration) exposed by `dotnet-monitor`. By following the instructions in the linked document, you can enable Azure Monitor to [enable monitoring pods](https://gist.github.com/shirhatti/0222017e8e2fdb481f735002f7bd72f7/revisions) that have been [annotated](https://gist.github.com/shirhatti/ad7a986137d7ca6b1dc094a3e0a61a0d#file-hello-world-deployment-yaml-L18-L19).

Reviewer 3: Metrics has some additional configurations (that can be configured with environment variables or config maps):
DotnetMonitor_PrometheusConfiguration__MetricCount - maximum metric count to store in memory. defaults to 3.
DotnetMonitor_PrometheusConfiguration__UpdateIntervalSeconds - how frequently we poll metrics. defaults to 10 seconds.

Author: Maybe omit it for brevity? We should definitely have it in the docs, but I guess it is not needed in the blog post

Reviewer 3: Sounds good.

> When deploying in-cluster, a common patter to collect metrics is to use Prometheus or another monitoring tool to scrape the metrics endpoint exposed by your application. As an example, when running in Azure Kubernetes Services(AKS), you can [configure Azure Monitor to scrape prometheus metrics](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/azure-monitor/insights/container-insights-prometheus-integration) exposed by `dotnet-monitor`. By following the instructions in the linked document, you can enable Azure Monitor to [enable monitoring pods](https://gist.github.com/shirhatti/0222017e8e2fdb481f735002f7bd72f7/revisions) that have been [annotated](https://gist.github.com/shirhatti/ad7a986137d7ca6b1dc094a3e0a61a0d#file-hello-world-deployment-yaml-L18-L19).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When deploying in-cluster, a common pattern to collect metrics is to use Prometheus or another monitoring tool to scrape the metrics endpoint exposed by your application. As an example, when running in Azure Kubernetes Services(AKS), you can [configure Azure Monitor to scrape prometheus metrics](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/azure-monitor/insights/container-insights-prometheus-integration) exposed by `dotnet-monitor`. By following the instructions in the linked document, you can enable Azure Monitor to [enable monitoring pods](https://gist.github.com/shirhatti/0222017e8e2fdb481f735002f7bd72f7/revisions) that have been [annotated](https://gist.github.com/shirhatti/ad7a986137d7ca6b1dc094a3e0a61a0d#file-hello-world-deployment-yaml-L18-L19).
```

The duration of collection can be customized via the `durationSeconds` querystring parameter. The diagnostic data present in the trace can be customized via the `profile` querystring parameter to include any combination of the preset profiles:

- `CPU` (CPU profiler),
- `Http` (Request start/stop events from ASP.NET Core),
- `Logs` (Logging from the `EventSourceLogger` from `Microsoft.Extensions.Logging` library); and
- `Metrics`(Runtime and ASP.NET Core `EventCounters`).

For example, a request to  `/trace?profile=cpu,logs` will enable the collection of the CPU profiler and logs.

In addition to the `GET` endpoint, there is `POST` version of the endpoint which allows you to specify what `EventSource` providers to enable via the request body. 

To collect a trace of the target process, run the following command:

In PowerShell,

```powershell
PS> Start-Process http://localhost:52323/trace
```

In bash,
```bash
$ wget --content-disposition http://localhost:52323/trace
```

The resulting `.nettrace` file can be analyzed with both Visual Studio and PerfView.

### Logs

The `/logs` endpoint will stream logs from the target process for a duration of 30 seconds.

> The duration of collection can be customized via the `durationSeconds` querystring parameter. The logs endpoint is capable of returning either newline delimited JSON([application/x-ndjson](https://github.com/ndjson/ndjson-spec)) or the Event stream format([text/event-stream](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/Server-sent_events/Using_server-sent_events#Event_stream_format)) based on the specified `Accept` header in the HTTP request.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The duration of collection can be customized via the `durationSeconds` querystring parameter. The logs endpoint is capable of returning either newline delimited JSON ([application/x-ndjson](https://github.com/ndjson/ndjson-spec)) or the Event stream format([text/event-stream](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/Server-sent_events/Using_server-sent_events#Event_stream_format)) based on the specified `Accept` header in the HTTP request.
```

{"LogLevel":"Information","EventId":"ExecutingEndpoint","Category":"Microsoft.AspNetCore.Routing.EndpointMiddleware","Message":"Executing endpoint \u0027/Index\u0027","Scopes":{"RequestId":"0HM0N9ARKHVJK:00000002","RequestPath":"/","SpanId":"|88c401de-4df03365b379aaa4.","TraceId":"88c401de-4df03365b379aaa4","ParentId":""},"Arguments":{"EndpointName":"/Index","{OriginalFormat}":"Executing endpoint \u0027{EndpointName}\u0027"}}
```

### Metrics

The `/metrics` endpoint will return a snapshot of runtime and ASP.NET Core metrics in the [prometheus exposition format](https://prometheus.io/docs/instrumenting/exposition_formats/#text-based-format). Unlike the other diagnostics endpoints, the metrics endpoint will not be available if `dotnet-trace` detects more than one target process. In addition to being accessible via the URLs configured via the `--urls` parameters, the metrics endpoint is also accessible from the URLs configured via the `--metricUrls`. When running in Kubernetes, it may be suitable to expose the metrics URL to other services in your cluster to allow them to scrape metrics.

> When deploying in-cluster, a common pattern to collect metrics is to use Prometheus or another monitoring tool to scrape the metrics endpoint exposed by your application. As an example, when running in Azure Kubernetes Services(AKS), you can [configure Azure Monitor to scrape prometheus metrics](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/azure-monitor/insights/container-insights-prometheus-integration) exposed by `dotnet-monitor`. By following the instructions in the linked document, you can enable Azure Monitor to [enable monitoring pods](https://gist.github.com/shirhatti/0222017e8e2fdb481f735002f7bd72f7/revisions) that have been [annotated](https://gist.github.com/shirhatti/ad7a986137d7ca6b1dc094a3e0a61a0d#file-hello-world-deployment-yaml-L18-L19).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
When deploying in-cluster, a common pattern to collect metrics is to use Prometheus or another monitoring tool to scrape the metrics endpoint exposed by your application. As an example, when running in Azure Kubernetes Services (AKS), you can [configure Azure Monitor to scrape prometheus metrics](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/azure-monitor/insights/container-insights-prometheus-integration) exposed by `dotnet-monitor`. By following the instructions in the linked document, you can enable Azure Monitor to [enable monitoring pods](https://gist.github.com/shirhatti/0222017e8e2fdb481f735002f7bd72f7/revisions) that have been [annotated](https://gist.github.com/shirhatti/ad7a986137d7ca6b1dc094a3e0a61a0d#file-hello-world-deployment-yaml-L18-L19).
```

Author: Thanks @loic-sharma
